Okay, let's start. This is Ron Shorn on March 26,
1994, interviewing Andrew T. Young. So, Andy, for
the record, what's your name and the date and place
of birth? Andrew T. Young. I was born in Canton,
Ohio, April 4, 1935. How did you get interested in
astronomy? interested in astronomy was when I was
nine years old, there was a night school course on
astronomy given at the local high school. And my
parents decided to go, but they couldn't find a
babysitter. So they dragged me along and told me to
sit in the back and keep quiet. And I was absolutely
fascinated with what went on. The course was
taught by Oscar Lee Gustheimer, who was a retired
professor of astronomy from Baldwin Wallace
College in Berea, Ohio. And I was absolutely sold
on astronomy by Professor Gustheimer. And from
that day on, I intended to become an astronomer. So
what about your schooling? I went to school in
Massillon, Ohio, which is where I grew up.
Never finished high school, but went into college
at Oberlin College on a Ford Foundation
scholarship. Graduated from Oberlin in 1955 with
a bachelor's degree and went to Harvard for
graduate school. I got my PhD in 61 or 62, I never can
remember which. Okay, what did you get your Ph.D.
in? Astronomy. What did you do with your thesis? It
was called Stellar Kinematics and Spiral Arms,
and I explained the vertex deviation of the
velocity ellipsoid by basically a selection
effect. If you form stars in spiral arms in
restricted regions of the galaxy, then only stars
with particular orbits pass through the solar
neighborhood and get observed. So the younger
stars are selectively a subsample of a complete
velocity ellipsoidy, kind of a mutilated
velocity distribution. Did that hold up? Gee, I
don't know. Nobody has used it in years. All right.
Obviously, that doesn't have very much
connection with planetary astronomy. No, it
certainly doesn't. How did you get interested in
planetary astronomy? Well, I had a small
telescope. Actually, my father bought a
skyscope, which was a three and a half inch
reflector telescope. as a result of this night
school course.
I actually made an 8-inch telescope of my own while
I was in high school. Planets were something you
could look at, so I had some interest in planets, as
most amateur astronomers do. When I got to Harvard
as a graduate student, I guess the thing that kind
of aimed me in that direction was that Quipple
asked me to do a research report on planetary
atmospheres. He was concerned about the origin
and evolution of planetary atmospheres and
basically made me do a literature search for him.
And so that kind of got me interested in the
subject. And I was also interested in photometry.
I'd gotten interested in the possibilities of
photometry from articles in Sky and Telescope and
articles in Popular Astronomy that I'd read in
high school and college. And somehow, I can't
remember exactly how now, oh, I guess it must have
been who probably got me interested in this. What
was your art then, at Harvard? Yeah, at Harvard.
Let
me think. This was in 1956 or 57. I read a paper by
Harold Johnson on UBD photometry of Mars. And I
guess because of my interest in photometry and my
interest in Mars,
honestly, I can't remember at this late date how I
got into this problem. But I was concerned about
photometry of Mars. I guess I had looked up the old
Cogger and Guthnick articles. Yeah, that was it.
Looked up the old Cogger and Guthnick articles in
which they had a rotational light curve of Mars.
What journal was that in? That was in the
publications of the Berlin Babelsberg
Observatory back around 1914, give or take a
couple of years. And interestingly enough, I
discovered this past year when I was at the
Deutsches Museum in Munich that their instrument
has survived and is in the museum there. You can
actually see that historic instrument. That was
the instrument with which the first anything
resembling modern photoelectric photometry was
actually done. Well, anyway, they published a
rotational light curve of Mars. And I noticed that
Harold Johnson's light curve of Mars was totally
different. Couldn't understand why. and did an
odd thing. I copied out his numbers. This was
before the days of Xerox machines. So I copied out
his table of numbers, but I didn't want to copy out
everything. So I just copied out the times and the
magnitudes and took them home with me to work on and
had a copy of the American Ephemeris and Nautical
Almanac in those days from which I could look up and
calculate the physical ephemeris of Mars. And
when I did so and calculated central meridians and
plotted up his results, I got a light curve that
looked just like Carter and Guthnick's and not at
all like Johnson's. And it took me a long time,
several days, to realize what had happened. But
when I finally went back and looked at Johnson's
table, where he had central meridians, his
central meridians were totally different from
mine. And after much cogitation and consulting
the tables of the astronomical almanac, I finally
realized that what had happened was this, that
because Mars rotates through about 350 degrees
every day, the central meridians that are listed
in the almanac and the physical ephemeris differ
by about 10 degrees from one day to the next. And
Johnson and Gardner had interpolated in this
10-degree arc instead of the 350-degree arc. so i
caught harold johnson making a dumb mistake and uh
published it in pasp and so offended johnson that i
was never able to publish in the astrophysical
journal for years but anyway that's that's what
got me going in that as a result of that effort uh
menzel and the folklore picked me as the guy to take
over their uh and run on a day-to-day basis their
planetary photometry project that was sponsored
by NASA. So that's kind of how I got to that stage.
Was that project funded originally by NASA right
from the very start? So far as I know, it was. Okay,
because NASA didn't start until 1958. Yeah,
that's right. That project started up a couple of
years after my paper. Menzel and I think Kupel
might have even been involved in it. And
DeVoe-Klor were, Menzel and DeVoe-Klor at least,
were the principal investigators. And shortly
after the thing was funded, or maybe even before it
was funded, the Vocaloid went to Texas. And it was
at that point that they needed somebody else to
take over the project at Harvard, and I got tapped
for that. I remember Menzel at that meeting. Which
meeting? meeting where we first met and where the
earth shook. Oh, that's right. That's the meeting
where you were the guy, you and Roger Moore were the
representatives from NASA headquarters. They
were the people who were funding you. You were the
guys that were funding me, that's right. So we got
into the great man Menzel's main office. Into his
office, his inner sanctum. And then we shook hands
and you were the first speaker and you were leading
on the blackboard. I was writing something on the
blackboard. And then all of a sudden... Well, all
of a sudden what happened was a heavy truck went by,
except when you looked out in the street there were
no trucks. And Menzel, as I recall, sat there,
timing? Looking at his watch. That's right. That
puzzled me that he was looking at his watch. And
after a while, I dawned on people other than Nunzel
that it was an earthquake. It was just timing and
periodism. Yes, yes. Anyway, I recall him saying
the justification for this was that actually
there wasn't any precise one third of the
planetary planets in existence. That's
absolutely correct. Which kind of didn't astound
me, but it did shake me up a little bit. Yeah, yeah.
Well, that's because planetary photometry had
been in such bad repute for so many years that
basically nothing had been done since the work of
the 19th century German observers. Zollner and
people like that. Zollner, and by the way,
Zollner's original photometer is also in the
Deutsches Museum if you want to see it. And the
world's very first photometer, the very first
visual photometer made by Steinhall, is also
still in existence in the Deutsches Museum. It's a
wonderful place to go with people. are interested
in the history of photometry. This isn't directly
related to you, but it is directly related to the
project. I have given Zollner more emphasis than
he normally gets. Zollner and Miller. I read their
papers. Oh, there's an interesting footnote to
that, by the way. I read the papers by Zollner and
Miller back when I was a graduate student working
on this problem, looking up the past history of the
subject of planetary photometry. And when I got to
JPL many years later, One of the things I retained
from that literature search was that the
properties of Mercury and the properties of the
Moon were very similar and that Mars and indeed all
these objects were drastically different from
Lambert's law in particular. And of course that
had also been emphasized by Henry Norris Russell
in his rediscussion of their observations. Back
in the days when noted astronomers could still do
planetary work. That's right. background again
uh 1910 1916 it's in the app j back there somewhere
um and when i got to jpl uh there was this big flap
about the mariner 4 pictures which had had uh very
low contrast and showed a great deal of light
extending out into the sky beyond the limb of mars
and it turned out that a student of bruce murray's
had attempted to analyze all this stuff on the
basis of the Lambert law. And, of course, that was
because Bruce Murray didn't know anything, and
Leighton was a physicist and didn't know anything
about planetary photometry. Well, but you do
think Mars is much more like the Moon than Earth.
Yeah, right. And, of course, I knew that the Moon
was drastically different from the Lambert Law.
So I instantly saw that this was a fallacious
analysis and went on to demonstrate that all that
was, in fact, due to stray light in their Mariner 4
camera. But at any rate, I remember going down and
talking to Layton about this on campus one time and
showed him a draft of my paper refuting his work.
And he said, well, you write this as though any fool
would know better. And I said, well, yeah. Because
anybody that was familiar with planetary
photometry knew that Lambert's Law was
definitely not applicable. But let me tell you the
topper on this. The topper was that when I went to
the Caltech library to look up, to double-check
Mueller's work, the pages were all uncut. No one at
Caltech had ever read Mueller's work. Oh
yeah, what
I have put in, I guess it's in chapter three, no,
chapter two, chapter three, is about Zandler's
work and how he, He knew about Lambert's law, and he
did the first accurate with conical prisms
photometry. He had the polarizing photometer.
Yeah, moons, variation, brightness, and faith.
And so immediately, there was not Lambert, and got
this completely unexpected result by an
unexpected method. The moon surface was very
irregular on a microscopic scale. So Zalner gets
in there, but he certainly was the weirdest
looking guy ever. Oh, yeah? I've never seen a
picture of him.
Okay, so you did this project at Harvard for how
long? Oh, until I left Harvard, and it was taken
over by Bill Irvine. And let's see, I left Harvard
in 63, and I started that project, it must have
been, I started that project before I got my PhD, so
it must have been around 59, I think, that I began
working on that. So roughly 59 to 63. Okay, and how
did you get to go to Texas University? Harlan Smith
invited me to go down. Actually, Menzel later told
me he had told Harlan that I was a good guy and should
be invited for a job interview. Harlan very
astutely invited me to go to Texas in the middle of
February.
He was well known for that tactic. Yeah, right. It
worked in my case. I certainly was easily seduced
to a warmer climate. Oh, by the way, I forgot to
mention at the beginning, this interview is being
taped at the Shorn Ranch in Brazos County, Texas.
All right. OK, so you accepted. So I immediately
accepted Harlan's invitation and left. So when
did you actually begin at UT? I began at UT. I've got
to make a correction here, Ron. My memory had
failed me there for a minute. I actually left that
planetary technology project a couple of years
earlier, 61 or 62, because I had been offered a
postdoc position by ORT. And because of family
complications, I was never able to accept that.
But I had resigned my position. And Bill Irvine
took that over a year or so before I went to Texas. So
what did you do between the time you left that
project? I was working on another solar system
project that was run by Hector Angrio at Harvard's
Smithsonian. He was making 10 micron thermal
infrared measurements of the moon. And there were
about six people working on that. There was
Hector, who was in charge of the project and was a
very good engineer. He had designed the
instrument that we used. There was an electronics
technician who built amplifiers for the
instrument. There was a mechanical engineer that
did the precise machining that was required. And
there were a couple of secretaries and data
reducers. And I was the astronomer. I was the
observer on that. Back in the days when
astronomers actually observed? I'll say
astronomers actually observed. I had the
privilege, Paul, on that project of observing at
the Newtonian focus of the Radcliffe reflector
when it was still outside Pretoria on the coldest
night ever recorded in Pretoria. I was up there
freezing and relaying temperatures from the
thermometer we had at the eyepiece, and
Thackeray, the observatory director, was saying
to Hector, he must be reading the thermometer
wrong. It never gets that cold here. How cold was
it? It was something like 20 degrees. It was well
below freezing. Tell me something about, well,
there's two questions. One is about Menzo, who I
can interview. And then we'll get on to a more
general question. But first of all, Menzo had one
of the early, when he was out of grad school or
something, he did an estimate of Martian surface
pressure. Oh, did he? I wasn't aware of that. Well,
back in 1926, Menzo had published an article using
visual photographic albedo observations. Okay,
so that must have been why Menzel was interested in
photometry of Mars as well. Right, and an upper
limit for the surface pressure of Mars, which it
turns out was correct, and in fact was below the
value quoted by Gerard de Bacallure in his famous
book, Physics of the Planet. That's interesting.
I didn't know that. And there is a story that I have
heard that I can't document, to the effect that
Menzel was taken aside by somebody at Harvard,
presumably the great man himself. Carlos
Shackley told a young man, if you want to keep a job
in astronomy, if you want to feature in this field,
that you should get out of this nonsense of
planetary astronomy and get into real astronomy.
Have you heard anything about that? I haven't
heard that story, or at least I don't remember
hearing that story, but it sounds entirely
credible. I can't interview Menzel. What kind of a
guy was he? Well, at the time I was a graduate
student, Menzel was a terrible stuffed shirt. He
was pompous. He was not keeping up with current
events scientifically. I remember there was a
notorious occasion. in which Armin Deutsch had
done a spherical harmonic analysis of magnetic
fields on some rotating magnetic star. And at the
end of his talk, this was at a AAS meeting that was
actually held in Cambridge, At the end of his talk,
Menzel stood up and said, well, have you
considered using spherical harmonics? And
Deutsch looked absolutely baffled and said, but I
thought that's what I did. That was kind of a
typical Menzel performance. He was just out of it
and over the hill by then. And strangely enough, as
a result of this planetary photometry project,
One of the things that came out was a really good
measurement of the albedo of Venus as a function of
wavelength, which really showed quantitatively
the amount of absorption in the ultraviolet. And
shortly before he died, I ran into Menzel at a An IAU
symposium in Torun, Poland. That would have been
in 73 or 74. Copernicus. The Copernicus thing,
yeah. And Menzel had the temerity to say to me, I've
never believed in this ultraviolet absorber on
VS. It looks white to me. I was just speechless. I
didn't know what to say because it was his own
project that had quantitatively shown the
existence of the ultraviolet absorber that had
been previously inferred, of course, from W.H.
Wright's photographs and other such
measurements much earlier.
You had Whipple, who certainly was interested in
the solar system. Yeah, Whipple was a good guy to
work for. And you had Menzel, who had been and now
was interested in the solar system. Yeah, had an
interest, but he was full of useless information.
One thing he did, for example, on Venus was to
imagine that the high temperature measured for
Venus was due to an enormous electron density in
its ionosphere. So he sent me off on a wild goose
chase to learn about ionospheres. Oh, man. I
looked that stuff up. I quickly found he was off by
many orders of magnitude. And that taught me just
to ignore anything that Menzel suggested after
that. And he quickly forgot these suggestions for
the most part. You could sort of nod and smile and
then go off and ignore them. But there's other
people who were there at the same time, like
Imbrow. Yes. And also there was Whipple and JL and
Hynek and those people because they had the, what
was it, the IGY? Oh, that was the Moonwatch
business that Smithsonian was running. Well,
that means that at least at that time, they were
willing to take money to do research on the solar
system, which, as I gather, Let me tell you
something about Quipple's connection in this.
Quipple got into this through the meteor program.
Harvard had a long-standing meteor program that
involved Quipple because of his interest in
meteors and comets and meteoroids as fragments of
comets and so on. Luigi Acchia, I'm not quite sure
how he got into it. And there were several people at
Harvard who were supported on the media program.
They also developed the Super Schmidt cameras.
The Super Schmidt cameras were developed by Baker
himself, who was associated, he was some kind of an
associate on the Harvard staff, not paid by
Harvard, but had an office and showed up about once
a month. And so Whipple's interest in the upper
atmosphere densities, or I shouldn't say his
interest, but his authority as an expert on upper
atmosphere densities got him called in very
early, before even there was a NASA, there was a
thing called the rocket panel. Remember the
rocket panel? That was set up to decide how to use
scientifically the V2 rockets that have been
captured at the end of World War II. And later, when
the IGY came along, that had its name expanded, and
it became the Rocket and Satellite Panel. And
people remained a member of it when it was the
Rocket and Satellite Panel. So he was there on that
panel as an expert on upper atmosphere densities,
which he had gotten through the Meteor Project.
And so that was how this business of satellite
tracking, I'm sure how he got the connection
there. But still, for Volker, there were many
great It was considered demeaning to work for NSA
or prostituting yourself. It was dirty money, and
the planetary work was a dead end because it had all
been done by Adams and Dutton and Polarges. Did you
find that at Harvard? Oh, yes. You certainly got
that attitude. And I remember when Kuiper came and
talked to us, He mentioned that he had received
criticism for doing that Lunar Atlas project.
Which was done with Air Force One. That's right.
But he had been criticized for doing that instead
of doing honest astronomy, you know, decent
astronomy. Because Piper had started out doing
things like the effective temperature scale. He
had a paper in the 1930s, 36-ish, as I recall, late
30s sometime. in which he had done a good
recalibration of the effective temperature
scale. It started out in stellar astronomy. Then
he went into close binaries and mass ratios, which
led him into a mass ratio association plan between
Sun and Jupiter. Did you get the feeling that this
new planetary and solar system work at second rate
was general? It certainly was, yeah.
Did Harvard take any money from the Air Force?
Harvard had a lot of Air Force money, and the reason
was that the Air Force Bedford Laboratories, as
they were called. Well, it was originally the Air
Force Cambridge Research Laboratories, and they
moved out to Bedford. But the Air Force labs were
nearby, and people at Harvard Observatory had
connections there. And so there were a lot of
airport-sponsored projects. For example, I was
hired one summer to try to make sense of a release of
a barium cloud or something like that from, maybe
it was nitric oxide, but anyway, something that
was released from a rocket in the upper
atmosphere. They'd used the Super Schmitz to take
photographs of it. They wanted to track the
motion. get upper atmosphere winds, that kind of
stuff. So yeah, there was a lot of that kind of stuff
going on at Harvard. There was also Office of Naval
Research, but that was done for more classical
type of stellar astronomical studies. Gee, there
was a lot of ONR work, but I was never employed on one
of the ONR programs. So I can't really tell you, but
I know people talked about ONR. The ONR got
involved, you remember, early in radio
astronomy. They had that radio dish on top of their
building in Washington someplace. They also
built the radio telescope at the University of
Illinois. Oh, did they? Okay. So because one of the
first places involved in radio astronomy was
Harvard, there were connections there, I guess.
Bach, you remember, was one of the people who was
involved in radio astronomy. He was 21 centimeter
long. And because of Ewan and Purcell's work in...
the co-discovery of the 21 centimeter line there
at Harvard. That was why radio astronomy got an
early start at Harvard earlier than many other
places. In fact, it was while I was a graduate
student that they finally decided about my third
or fourth year in graduate school that they were
going to give a different set of prelim exams to the
radio astronomers because they needed a
sufficiently different background than the
optical astronomers. Instead of giving the same
set of questions to everybody, they were going to
have a two-track system. When NSA was first born,
that was, let's see, 59, I guess. No, 58. 58,
probably, because it was right after school. What
was the attitude by then? You got your Ph.D. I
forgot. I got my Ph.D. in 61 or 62, so I was still a
graduate student. But what were the comments you
heard about NESA? Because they were coming with a
lot of money, space research, solar system
research. What sort of comments did you hear from
science? Oh, gosh. There wasn't an awful lot of
reaction to it at first. The main interest around
Harvard was in the satellite tracking program.
Huppel and Hynek were the guys that were the chief
motivators behind that.
I guess the bigger
scandal at the time was the fight over moving the
Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory from
Washington to Cambridge. because it had always
been associated with the Smithsonian
Institution of Washington in the era of Charles
Greeley Abbott. And Whipple and other people who
were interested in solar activity had been very
critical of Abbott's work. And the whole thing
was, when Whipple was made the new director, the
whole thing was just picked up and moved to Harvard
and Abbott's stuff and the whole Solar constant
measurement program, all that stuff was done. So
it was a major change in direction. And I think that
was more of a notorious cause than the creation of
NASA, which wasn't viewed as being terribly
important at first, at least not by the people at
Harvard. As I say, we got some grants from NASA, and
it was regarded as kind of just another funding
agency like the Air Force.
Well,
when they started up, of course, things were much
more informal and less bureaucratic than they are
today When they started up, the bureaucracy was
not so multilevel, and the oversight of contracts
was much more simplified. I used to send in
quarterly reports about a page long that were
hardly more than a letter, and we'd have an annual
report that would be maybe five or six pages long,
but nothing terribly big. I had a secretary that
did some of the financial accounting that was
required. All that stuff had to be done in-house.
There weren't these grant handling subsidiaries
that organizations have these days. And so it was
all kept to the level where individual scientists
could manage it. So it was quite tolerable at that
time in the 60s. It gradually grew more and more
top-heavy as time went on. Now, since I've been on
both sides of this issue, I can ask you this with
equal subjectivity at both ends. All right. Back
in the early days, there was a lot of comment among
scientists, the managers, the people who were
coming monitoring contracts from the United
States, were incompetent and didn't know any
science. And they just had to put up with these
fools. Do you think that was the widespread
attitude? I do think so. I guess there was
criticism of NASA really fairly early on that it
had staffed its organization with people swept up
off the street rather than with competent
scientists.
There wasn't an awful lot of scientific expertise
at NASA headquarters. As I say, we regarded NASA as
kind of similar to NASA. the Air Force in terms of
being a funding agency. We didn't have any
impression that the NASA guys had much
astronomical background. And in fact, as I
recall, I wrote a nasty letter to the editor of
science back in, oh goodness, when was it? It must
have been about that time, 59, 60, 61, somewhere in
there, about the time I got my PhD, complaining
about people talking about things outside low
Earth orbit as deep space. And I was called on the
carpet by Menzel for offending these granting
agencies and telling me that I should clear
anything like that that went out with him before I
sent it out.
I guess you should go back and read what I wrote in
that letter to science if you can dig it up. Okay, so
you went to Texas in what year? 63, yeah. Was it 63 or
was it 65? Let me think now. You were at Harvard in
either 63 or 64 whenever that earthquake took
place. Okay, so it must have been 65 when I was in
Texas for two years. Must have gone in 65 and left in
67. Yeah, that would be right. Went to Texas in 65. I
said 63 earlier, but that was wrong. OK. Now, at
Texas, the director at that time was Harlan J.
Smith. Right. What kind of a guy was Harlan? Harlan
was an interesting guy. He radiated sincerity,
which made him a master of grantsmanship.
He unfortunately didn't radiate scientific
competence, or at least not to me. I was appalled at
some of the things he did. But he was enthusiastic,
and I'm sure he believed everything he said. The
sincerity was not a fake. And he was very good at
building up the department there, and argued
continually that they had to make the place big
before they could make it good. And I had just the
opposite view, which contributed to my leaving. I
didn't like the way things were going.
But Harlem was entirely pleasant, but not real
savvy as far as science goes, I would say. Now, DFT
was unusual in that it was possible to get
telescope time from a major telescope, 82-inch.
to do work on the planets. That's right. Was that
due to Harlan? That was probably DeVocalor's
influence, I would guess. I think Harlan
respected GDV very considerably, and I think it
was probably DeVocalor who pushed the planetary
aspect there. Of course, after the 107 inch was
built, that was specifically for the purpose of
planetary stuff, and that was part of around
Zempire building effort, and so he was happy to
follow the NASA money in that direction. But there
was some planetary work done with smaller
telescopes, in particular a lot done with the
82-inch. Well, for a long time, that was the only
large telescope in the world that devoted a
significant fraction of its time to planetary
work. Oh, yeah. Yeah. You remember Toby Owen's
story when he was at Caltech for a semester. Did you
talk to Toby Owen about this? I saw him in October,
but we didn't have time. Okay, you need to ask him
about this. He spent either a semester or a year, I
forget which, at Caltech. And he wanted to get
some, I think, twilight time to observe Venus or
Mars or something like that. And they wouldn't
give him any 200-inch time to look at anything
planetary.
But then, what the heck was it? He put in a proposal
to observe a comet or something like that. And they
granted him time for that, which surprised him.
And he was very keenly aware of the anti-solar
system bias. And the only way he could understand
getting time to observe this comet was he figured
the guys at Caltech must figure that stars come
from comets because they didn't see what the
connection was with planets, obviously. Okay,
where did you go from Texas? From Texas, I went for a
brief time to the Aerospace Corporation in El
Segundo, and then after about six months to the Jet
Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena. At the
Aerospace, where I was taking the night shift on
the millimeter radio telescope at the time, which
is why I seldom saw you there, you were supposed to
do solar astronomy. That's right. Aerospace had
the solar observatory, which was at Upper Van
Norman Reservoir in Sylmar, I believe it was. And
they had had a program of photographing the solar
granulation for several years with a small
telescope on Kodak 649 film, which was a super high
resolution film. The grains, in fact, were so
small that they were actually smaller on the
average than the penetration depth of optical
radiation into silver. So when you hold up these
negatives, they look greenish by transmitted
light. That's how small the grain size was. And
they were trying to understand seeing at their
site, which was sometimes good and sometimes bad.
And I had done some work on simulation and
atmospheric turbulence, and I think that was what
they were interested in there. Okay, so then where
did you go and why to JPL? I went to JPL and got a job at
JPL working with, what the heck was that group
called? I
can't remember. What year was it? That would have
been 68, I guess. And what was that group doing in
particular? The group I was with was involved in
the design of the Mariner cameras for Mariner 6 and
7. And I had been there for, oh, probably a couple of
months, finishing up some papers I'd been working
on earlier. And one day my boss came by and said, you
should be going to these Tuesday morning
meetings. I said, what Tuesday morning meetings?
Well, it turned out these Tuesday morning
meetings were the the Yerner 6 and 7, I guess it was
called Yerner 67 at that time, because that was the
year, imaging team meeting. And that was Robert
Layton, Bruce Murray, a bunch of JPL engineers.
There'd be about a thousand people in the room,
typically. And so I went to those meetings, and it
quickly became apparent that one of the things
they were concerned about was getting the
exposure correct. for this next round of Mariner
photographs of Mars, TV pictures of Mars. And
since I'd had some experience with planetary
photometry, they tapped me to look into the
problem. They had a very strange algorithm built
into their camera, which, because the camera
scans slowly across the disk of the planet at a
fixed phase angle, we just called it a fixed angle,
as the spacecraft swept by, they would sample a
little piece of the leading edge of one frame to
guess what the exposure should be for the next
frame. However, this was complicated by the fact
that all our frames were taken with red and green
filters. And there was some funny thing. They had
originally planned to have a third filter in the
system, a blue filter or something like that, and
then decided not to, to reduce the data to be
transmitted back or something like that. So
there'd be a red and a green pair and another red and
a green pair and another red and a green pair and
gaps in between the pairs. And so I made a little
simulation program to predict for various
reasonable photometric functions, not Lambert,
what was going on. It was as a result of that project
that I dug back into the We ordered four stops that
Leighton and Murray had done and showed it was
wrong. Actually, it was what Murray's graduate
student had done that was wrong. I don't think
Leighton and Murray really knew what was going on.
OK. How long did you stay at JPL? Let's see. I left
JPL in,
what was it, 73? 73. OK. What did you do at JPL
besides the photometric stuff? Well, I was
involved in that business, and they sort of, after
the fact, packed me onto their TV team there from
Mariner 6 and 7. And then the next project was the
Mariner 69 project, which was Mariners 8 and 9.
Mariner 8 wound up at the bottom of the Atlantic
Ocean, but Mariner 9 made it to Mars. So I was on that
TV team from the inception of it. And I was also
involved in some other stuff. Mariner 10 I was
peripherally involved in. I was the guy who told
them they needed to take UV pictures of Venus to see
what the cloud features looked like. If it hadn't
have been for me, they might not have thought of
that. It was certainly at my insistence that they
had to get into the UV, that they planned UV
capabilities for the camera there. Then when
Viking came along, I was on the Viking lander team.
and was involved in that. That was a funny thing,
because I got into that after the fact. The Viking
lander team, there had been a pre, you know,
there's always these, before the project exists,
there's the group put together to plan for it. And
there had been this lander camera team that had
written an impossible set of specifications
where they wanted to focus from three feet to
infinity with no changes in focus or at most one
focus step or something like that. And they wanted
a thousand to one signal to noise ratio. And they
wanted to scan at a certain rate so that you could
only look at a piece of the scene for a tenth of a
millisecond. And all these requirements were
mutually exclusive. If you just look at the laws of
physics, in order to get the angular resolution,
they demanded you have to add a lens a certain size.
In order to get the lens that big, you had to have
something like five or six focus steps between a
meter and infinity and besides if you made the lens
small enough that you could focus from here to
there with only one or two focus steps then you
didn't get enough photons in to meet their signal
to noise requirement it was all a hodgepodge and i
just i i somehow came across this memo with their
design statement as to what it was to do realized
that this contradicted the laws of physics wrote a
memo pointing this out and got stuck on that team
for a while Where did you go after JPL? After JPL,
let's see, I must have gone here to Texas A&M,
mustn't I? Yeah. And what did you do at Texas A&M? At
Texas A&M, well, I survived on my Viking money for a
while. I did some part-time teaching. Had several
proposals turned down by the National Science
Foundation. One day I got a phone call from... I got
a phone call from somebody at NASA headquarters
saying, somebody was saying, why aren't there any
proposals from Andy Young? So they asked me to send
them a proposal, and I sent them a proposal on
something, which I can no longer recall. which was
funded. And George Catawar and I did a lot of work in
which we looked at the brightness distribution
over the disk of Mars and Venus in various
spacecraft pictures and studied balloon
darkening and the scattering properties of the
atmospheres and stuff like that. Still
continuing basic planetary photometric stuff
and doing on the side a certain amount of planetary
spectroscopy. And then where did you go from
there? To San Diego State. And where you still are.
Well, sort of. And when did that happen? That would
have been 80 or something like that. 81. It was
right at the beginning of 81. And Louise had put in
for a National Research Council travel grant to go
and work with the people at the Space Research
Institute in Moscow on the Venera spectra of
Venus. And we hadn't had time to move in even in San
Diego before it was time to go off and pick that up.
So we just locked up the house and went off to Moscow
for three months. And that worked out okay. We had a
very interesting time in Moscow working with
Moroz and his co-workers and found they had a very
sharp group there. Very clever people. And what
have you been doing lately? Lately? Well... After
you came back from Moscow. Okay. After I came back
from Moscow, I continued to have some support from
NASA for a few years. That eventually petered out
and I wasn't able to resuscitate it. But about the
time that died, I got a grant from NSF, which I've
been living on for the past three or four years, in
stellar photometry, which was my interest for
many years also, in parallel with planetary
photometry. And in, I remember it was, 89? Yes, 89,
I became the vice president of Commission 25,
which is stellar photometry and polarimetry. and
then became the president of the succeeding
meeting in Buenos Aires. So I'm currently
coordinating the activities of IAU Commission 25
on stellar photometry. So I've kind of gotten out
of the planetary business as a result. Do you think
that the real quote-unquote astronomers still
look down on planetary studies, solar system
studies? Not as much as they used to for several
reasons. One is that people have begun to
appreciate the connection between planets and
the process of star formation and to realize that
planetary systems are a useful link in
understanding the star formation process,
questions of chemical evolution in the galaxy and
things of that sort. This also is a link between
things like the giant molecular clouds and
stellar astronomy and these objects also play an
important dynamical part in the rotation of
galaxies so i think the field has become more
unified with the rest of astronomy and people see
the interconnections of these fields more than
they used to i think it's less compartmentalized
in a way even though things have become more
specialized in recent years